whether you are reading a newspaper
article
or listening to a report on a radio or
talking to your own parents
grandparents friends aunts and uncles
about politics and economics
something to be aware of is the
relationship
between a thesis and an anecdote because
a great deal of what we do
as human beings i'm guilty this myself
as i'll explain just a moment
is that we present someone with a thesis
and most of the time if we know the
person we're speaking to we know the
audience we reach out to
we already know what it is they want to
believe
we know how biased they are in favor of
the thesis
and then we can present them with a
series of anecdotes that will
increase their conviction in this thesis
without the person really questioning
the relationship
between the anecdote and the thesis
whether or not one
actually supports the other whether or
not there might not be a wealth of other
anecdotes other considerations that are
just left out of this conversation
or left out of this news report right
that would really challenge
the relationship between thesis and
anecdote so we do this in economics
we do this in politics people come onto
youtube
and they tell you that bitcoin is a
great way to get rich quick or they tell
you that bitcoin is going to transform
the world of finance and economics as we
know it they tell you that bitcoin is
going to replace government-controlled
currency
and the banking system entirely these
things you know they
they put out this thesis for an audience
that already wants to believe and then
they'll
give a bunch of anecdotes and many of
those anecdotes
may be true but they don't actually
support the thesis
i would have a pretty easy time
convincing you
in the audience that richard nixon was a
terrible person
that richard nixon was a terrible
president of states
or let's just say richard nixon made a
series of decisions that really
ruined life on planet earth for the next
50 years
after his time enough something like
that some kind of thesis
that richard nixon was bad and evil
i i could write a book
i've done enough research i can write a
book about richard nixon all right
easily
and once i've established that thesis
for one thing
the only people who are going to watch
my youtube video or the only people
going to listen to me i may just be
talking to my friends or my family or
about this
they're people who probably already
sympathize with they're people who are
already interested oh
oh here's a youtube video about how
richard nixon was a terrible person oh
here's a youtube video that's going to
tell me why richard nixon was the worst
president in the
united states just the fact that they've
chosen to click on that video
parallel to someone who chooses to click
on a get rich quick
video about bitcoin or any other fad
idea
in free market economics at the moment
right the fact that you've chosen to
click on the video
means that you are very unlikely to
scrutinize the relationship between the
anecdote and the thesis
and the relationship between the
anecdote and myself
yourself as the member of the listening
partner like what does this mean to me
what's the relationship between me and
the anecdote and me and the thesis the
kind of
triangular analysis i'm inviting you
to imagine here right i can tell you
about how richard nixon was an alcoholic
i can tell you about richard nixon's
prescription drug habits
i can tell you about his bizarre
religious views
i can tell you i can quote verbatim some
things he said about black people
okay i can tell you some things about
his sex life
i can tell you some things they're gonna
make richard nixon sound
like a terrible person all right richard
nixon was president united states
in a very very difficult period
economically
and politically there is an argument to
be made
that if richard nixon were not president
of the united states
that what happened in american economics
it could have been worse
it could it could have been worse than
the great depression right like it was a
bad period for the economy
but without the decision richard nixon
maker someone else was in power
who made even worse decisions it could
work very difficult time politically
right people tend to forget this now
before richard nixon was president
united states
he had been vice president of the united
states he was one of the best educated
best prepared people for the role of
president united states because he had
this
long history in elite level politics
including global
international diplomacy right now i'm
i'm a very harsh critic
of virtual news i think he made a lot of
really bad decisions but what if it was
an amateur in that driver's seat what if
it was somebody more like
jfk who had been president of states at
the time where jfk himself who hadn't
gotten shot or something like this
have to think about some real different
pillars you know what you know what
really it could have been worse it could
have been world war three
it could have it could have been worse
than world war ii
i'm not joking i know enough about the
politics all right and i can tell you
some anecdotes that are actually
positive things about richard nixon one
that i like to mention again again
actually his relationship to american
indians to first nations people to the
indigenous people
of the united states and canada you show
me another president who cared
in the slightest down to and including
you know george w bush donald trump
you know bill clinton you know you show
me another president lyft fair
all right and we start to get a more
complex
nuanced view of what richard nixon
didn't decide what the
what the consequences were but the
problem is it's so easy
it's so easy because you want to believe
in the thesis and the anecdotes
each one of them may be true and may be
interesting and may be rewarding for you
to listen to
right what is bitcoin
all right and what is bitcoin as an
investment
and what is bitcoin as a currency
all right bitcoin is not a currency
bitcoin is the 21st century equivalent
to collecting baseball cards
if in the whole world there are only so
many
mickey mantle baseball cards don't
google it
he was a famous baseball player many
years ago
and basically all of the baseball cards
with his name and his face
are worth some money right not just his
rookie card generally speaking mickey
mantle baseball cards
are valuable how many thousand of them
are there in the world
number may be unknown but i mean these
were not scarce
during his lifetime right millions of
these little pieces of paper were
printed
same thing with valuable comic books
today valuable video games people
collecting video games in the 1980s
it's like dude several million of these
plastic cartridges were created in the
1980s
were not scarce but today they're
valuable today they're pers
why because they're perceived as
valuable because they collect okay
there's a
finite number of these
baseball cards in circulation and they
have
value because people desire them people
want to own them
people want to hold on to them and keep
them and many of those people
one day we'll resell them onto the
market
right how reliable is it
how certain are you that in the future
people will
still want to buy mickey mantle baseball
cards now one
thing is certain there won't be more of
them made the total number
of mickey mantle baseball cards even if
there were
21 million mickey mantle baseball cards
even if there were 21 million
x-men number one comic books x-men
number one is not as scarce as
batman or superman number one by the way
just just mentioning
um you know if there were 21 million of
them
the reality is every year some of them
are destroyed
some of them are lost they're kept in
someone's house and the house burns down
they're kept in someone's house and the
house is flooded right you know whatever
it is mold
you know some of them disappear right
and also some of them
people just take to their grave like
people keep
and they they never sell again they they
disappear for other
for other reasons right so there's one
thing you can be certain about the
supply
is not going to expand the supply
station but what you can't be certain
about is
in the future is anybody going to care
about mickey mantle is anyone going to
care about baseball cards in general or
this specific
culturally assigned value the
desirability
of a mickey mantle baseball in the
future are people going to care about
x-men
more or less are these x-men comic books
but point of view
there are enough of these items
that you actually could use x-men comic
books or mickey mantle baseball cards
someone you could use it as a currency
international the same way you're using
to a very limited extent the same way
people are today using
bitcoin right
now people buy bitcoin people invest
in bitcoin with the assumption that the
value will go up and up and up
the same way they are now buying into
baseball cards pokemon cards
video games the assumptions they'll go
up and up there's a finite number of
these things
in the world in the case of bitcoin if
you hadn't heard the magic number is
approximately 21 million
a finite number of bitcoins quote
unquote minted
and in reality every year
there are fewer and fewer of them
actually in circulation
and the rate of attrition the number of
these that just disappear
they're not going to be the number of
them that are stolen but the number of
them that are lost
right it's it's unknown probably with
time we'll start to get statistics as to
what percentage of them are really
circulating and what percentage of in
this way disappeared
there have been a number of headline
grabbing newspaper stories of people who
lost millions and millions of dollars
because the so-called keys to access
their bitcoin
were on a hard drive and the hard drive
is destroyed
the hard drive is lost the password
to that hard drive is forgotten now to
give you a very plausible scenario
what if your father bought some bitcoin
for you your father's an elderly person
and one day he's gonna pass on the
bitcoin for you and then he has a heart
attack
you know you could be it's on a hard
drive nobody knows the password
nobody's alive who knows the password
the bitcoin will in effect cease to
exist
they'll cease to miss your question so
every year if we're starting from 21
million
the same way that the number of
collectible comic books like a superman
or x-men comic or the number of mickey
mantle baseballs
the way that's getting fewer and fewer
right in some ways
in some ways you can say the value of
any particular bitcoin you have
it's reliable in as much as the
desirability
remains and the scarcity right it's
fixed but they're actually going to
become more
scarce with time right so that's that's
the value of bitcoin
as a collectible item right
neither truly as a currency nor
as an investment
now it's an unreliable
collectible item because you can't even
have the sense of security that you have
a comic book
or a baseball playing card in a safe
in your house that it's that that it is
located somewhere
that's safe again your house could light
on fire and burn down you could put it
away in a bank vault but the bank is
robbed
as possible right it's very unlikely but
with something
physically real like that you can feel
certain you've stored it somewhere
people do this with paintings they own
valuable paintings and they're kept in a
warehouse
and they pay a lot of money and it's a
secure warehouse where they feel certain
it can't get stolen and so on and so
forth it can't get damaged
by the water sprinklers turning on you
know even if there isn't a fire the
sprinklers turn on a ruin you're
ruining your painting so and so forth
right but with something physical bro
there's some level
certain if you look into the reality of
what theft means
for the world of bitcoin and digital
currency how these things are lost
sometimes just lost but sometimes how
they're stolen
right it's not safe it's not reliable
and its value will only continue to rise
or even continue to remain stable in as
much as it continues to be perceived
as desirable if people lose interest in
x-men
if people lose interest in baseball
players like mickey mantle
the value of these collectible items
will evaporate because they have
absolutely no
utility value it's hard to see that
right now
because of the cultural currency that
bitcoin has
in the imagination but bitcoin could
become another joke that people just
laugh about
10 or 20 years from now oh yeah right
remember bitcoin remember when we're
fast
cultural fads come and go this could
cease to be perceived to be something
valuable to hold on to
right now the other sense in which this
is just not
an investment is very simple very
important to keep in mind okay
saudi aramco
gas corporation gazprom in russia okay
if you give these companies one million
dollars you got one million dollars to
exist
they will take your one million dollars
and use it
to produce something they're going to
pump oil out of the ground
they're going to refine it they're going
to put it in a pipeline they're going to
send it to people's houses it's going to
get burned they're going to send it to
car factories
that burn the oil to manufacture cars
they make a product that has a knock-on
effect
of making other products it's part of
productivity
in our society okay if you buy baseball
cards
if you buy x-men comic books or you buy
superman comic books or you buy bitcoin
you are buying something that produces
absolutely
nothing now is something a product
a productive investment is something
productive
you can answer this question very simply
by posing the question
negatively what is the productivity of a
bridge
right now you may be investing in a
bridge building company you might be
investing in the actual bridge itself
depending on
okay this is not as obvious as a company
that pumps gasoline out of the ground
and burns it right but you can say okay
if there is no bridge if we demolish the
bridge like subtract the bridge or if we
never built the bridge
what would happen well people would have
to spend money instead having a boat
go back and forth there'd be several
companies doing fair right
well what really is the productivity of
this munitions company
that makes missiles and bombs and
bullets for the american army
well if that company goes bankrupt if we
delete that company
company the us army is gonna have to buy
bombs from somewhere else they're gonna
have to find another way to make the
bombs and missiles they need right so if
you think about it
negatively this way what is the function
in the market what is the type of
productivity what's its stage in the
cycle of production
that has to be replaced if you delete it
whether it's a bridge
or a bond manufacturing company okay
if you delete all of the mickey mantle
baseball cards from planet earth if
there is if there is a fire in a
warehouse
and every single if there's somebody has
a magical wish from a genie
and the genie flies around the world and
burns
every single mickey mantle baseball card
on earth
there is nothing to be replaced
there is no equivalent to burning down a
bridge
and then needing to have a boat having a
ferry company run a boat back and forth
there is no function to be replaced
there
if there is a magical genie that flies
around the world and destroys all the
bitcoin
which is not that improbable
technologically
right there bitcoin can be discredited
bitcoin can be hacked right there there
are things
you could have a scandal there have
already been several scandals that
discredited bitcoin temporarily though
not permanently
right with theft at the uh trading
company in japan
it was first family and so on uh mount
gox it was called you know
okay if all
of the bitcoin in the world disappears
what function is lost that will need to
be replaced
who would step up and say oh well now we
have to invent something new
to replace the function bitcoin play the
mark
the answer is there's absolutely nothing
okay bitcoin does not have use value
it doesn't have true productivity it is
not like
investing in a company that makes
something
and then makes a profit it is like
speculating on the buying and selling
of baseball cards you're buying a
baseball card or you're buying a comic
book and making the bet
that a few months from now or a few
years from now
it is going to appreciate in value
it's not a scam it's not a fraud
fundamentally it is just silly and what
you see now
are headlines about all the people who
have gotten rich
off of bitcoin there are no headlines
for the people who have lost money doing
bitcoin
there are headlines every time a mickey
mantle rookie card
goes on sale and is worth millions of
dollars it does it's covered in the
newspapers once in a while
superman call him like a batman comic an
x-men oh wow
a million dollars 10 million dollars at
this auction
right and there were no news stories
about the millions of people
who wasted money or lost money
trafficking in something that is
fundamentally
unproductive and intrinsically worthless